readme.md, before:

# node-module-import-map

Generate importmap for node_modules.

[![github package](https://img.shields.io/github/package-json/v/jsenv/jsenv-node-module-import-map.svg?logo=github&label=package)](https://github.com/jsenv/jsenv-node-module-import-map/packages)
[![npm package](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@jsenv/node-module-import-map.svg?logo=npm&label=package)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@jsenv/node-module-import-map)
[![github ci](https://github.com/jsenv/jsenv-node-module-import-map/workflows/ci/badge.svg)](https://github.com/jsenv/jsenv-node-module-import-map/actions?workflow=ci)
[![codecov coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/jsenv/jsenv-node-module-import-map/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/jsenv/jsenv-node-module-import-map)

# Table of contents

- [Presentation](#Presentation)
- [Usage](#Usage)
- [API](#API)
- [Configure VSCode and ESLint for importmap](#Configure-vscode-and-eslint-for-importmap)
- [Advanced documentation](#Advanced-documentation)

# Presentation

This repository generates [import map](https://github.com/WICG/import-maps) from `package.json` files in your `node_modules` directory. The generated importmap can be used to make code dependent of node module executable in a browser.

<details>
  <summary>See code relying on node module resolution</summary>

```js
import lodash from "lodash"
```

> The code above is expecting Node.js to "magically" find file corresponding to `"lodash"`. This magic is the [node module resolution algorith](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#modules_all_together).

> Other runtimes than Node.js, a browser like Chrome for instance, don't have this algorithm. Executing that code in a browser fetches `http://example.com/lodash` and likely results in `404 File Not Found` from server.

</details>

# Usage

<details>
  <summary>1 - Install <code>@jsenv/node-module-import-map</code></summary>

```console
npm install --save-dev @jsenv/node-module-import-map
```

</details>

<details>
  <summary>2 - Create <code>generate-import-map.js</code></summary>

```js
import { getImportMapFromProjectFiles, writeImportMapFile } from "@jsenv/node-module-import-map"

const projectDirectoryUrl = new URL("./", import.meta.url)

await writeImportMapFile(
  [
    getImportMapFromProjectFiles({
      projectDirectoryUrl,
    }),
  ],
  {
    projectDirectoryUrl,
    importMapFileRelativeUrl: "./project.importmap",
  },
)
```

Or use the commonjs equivalent if you need (or want):

```js
const {
  getImportMapFromProjectFiles,
  writeImportMapFile,
} = require("@jsenv/node-module-import-map")

const projectDirectoryUrl = __dirname

await writeImportMapFile(
  [
    getImportMapFromProjectFiles({
      projectDirectoryUrl,
    }),
  ],
  {
    projectDirectoryUrl,
    importMapFileRelativeUrl: "./project.importmap",
  },
)
```

</details>

<details>
  <summary>3 - Generate <code>project.importmap</code></summary>

```console
node generate-import-map.js
```

</details>

<details>
  <summary>4 - Add <code>project.importmap</code> to your html</summary>

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Title</title>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <link rel="icon" href="data:," />
    <script type="importmap" src="./project.importmap"></script>
  </head>

  <body>
    <script type="module">
      import lodash from "lodash"
    </script>
  </body>
</html>
```

If you use a bundler or an other tool, be sure it's compatible with import maps.

> Because import map are standard, you can expect your bundler/tools to be already compatible or to become compatible without plugin in a near future.

> [@jsenv/core](https://github.com/jsenv/jsenv-core) seamlessly supports importmap during development, unit testing and when building for production.

</details>

# API

## writeImportMapFile

`writeImportMapFile` is an async function receiving an array of promise resolving to importmaps. It awaits for every importmap, compose them into one and write it into a file.

<details>
  <summary>writeImportMapFile code example</summary>

Code below generate an import map from node_modules + an inline importmap.

```js
import { getImportMapFromProjectFiles, writeImportMapFile } from "@jsenv/node-module-import-map"

const projectDirectoryUrl = new URL("./", import.meta.url)
const importMapInputs = [
  getImportMapFromProjectFiles({
    projectDirectoryUrl,
    dev: true,
  }),
  {
    imports: {
      foo: "./bar.js",
    },
  },
]

await writeImportMapFile(importMapInputs, {
  projectDirectoryUrl,
  importMapFileRelativeUrl: "./import-map.importmap",
})
```

[implementation](./src/writeImportMapFile.js)

</details>

<details>
  <summary>importMapInputs parameter</summary>

`importMapInputs` is an array of importmap object or promise resolving to importmap objects. This parameter is optional and is an empty array by default.

> When `importMapInputs` is empty a warning is emitted and `writeImportMapFile` write an empty importmap file.

</details>

<details>
  <summary>importMapFile parameter</summary>

`importMapFile` parameter is a boolean controling if importMap is written to a file. This parameters is optional and enabled by default.

</details>

<details>
  <summary>importMapFileRelativeUrl parameter</summary>

`importMapFileRelativeUrl` parameter is a string controlling where importMap file is written. This parameter is optional and by default it's `"./import-map.importmap"`.

</details>

## getImportMapFromProjectFiles

`getImportMapFromProjectFiles` is an async function returning an importMap object computed from infos found in `package.json` files and source files.

The following source of information are used to create complete and coherent mappings in the importmap.

- Your `package.json`
- All `dependencies` declared in `package.json` are searched into `node_modules`, recursively.
- The main file declared in your `package.json`
- All static and dynamic import found in files, recursively.

<details>
  <summary>getImportMapFromProjectFiles code example</summary>

```js
import { getImportMapFromProjectFiles } from "@jsenv/node-module-import-map"

const importMap = await getImportMapFromProjectFiles({
  projectDirectoryUrl: new URL("./", import.meta.url),
  dev: false,
  runtime: "browser",
})
```

> Be sure node modules are on your filesystem because we'll use the filesystem structure to generate the importmap. For that reason, you must use it after `npm install` or anything that is responsible to generate the node_modules folder and its content on your filesystem.

[implementation](./src/getImportMapFromProjectFiles.js)

</details>

<details>
  <summary>projectDirectoryUrl parameter</summary>

`projectDirectoryUrl` parameter is a string url leading to a folder with a `package.json`. This parameters is **required** and accepted values are documented in [@jsenv/util#assertAndNormalizeDirectoryUrl](https://github.com/jsenv/jsenv-util#assertandnormalizedirectoryurl)

</details>

<details>
  <summary>dev parameter</summary>

`dev` parameter is a boolean indicating if the importmap will be used for development or production. This parameter is optional and by default it's disabled.

When enabled the following happens:

1. `devDependencies` declared in your `package.json` are included in the generated importMap.
2. `"development"` is favored over `"production"` in [package.json exports conditions](https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v15.x/docs/api/packages.html#packages_conditions_definitions).

</details>

<details>
  <summary>runtime parameter</summary>

`runtime` parameter is a string indicating where the importmap will be used. This parameter is optional with a default of `"browser"`.

When `runtime` is `"browser"`, `"browser"` is favored over `"node"` in [package.json exports conditions](https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v15.x/docs/api/packages.html#packages_conditions_definitions).

When it is `"node"`, `"node"` is favored.

</details>

## getImportMapFromFile

`getImportMapFromFile` is an async function reading importmap from a file.

<details>
  <summary>getImportMapFromFile code example</summary>

```js
import { getImportMapFromFile } from "@jsenv/node-module-import-map"

const importMap = await getImportMapFromFile({
  projectDirectoryUrl: new URL("./", import.meta.url),
  importMapRelativeUrl: "./import-map.importmap",
})
```

[implementation](./src/getImportMapFromFile.js)

</details>

<details>
  <summary>importMapFileRelativeUrl</summary>

`importMapFileRelativeUrl` parameter is an url relative to `projectDirectoryUrl` leading to the importmap file. This parameter is **required**.

</details>

# Configure VSCode and ESLint for importmap

VSCode and ESLint can be configured to understand importmap. This will make ESLint and VSCode capable to resolve your imports. Amongst other things it will give you the following:

- ESLint report an error when import cannot be resolved (help to fix typo)
- ESLint report an error in case named import does not exists (help to fix typo too)
- VSCode "go to definition" opens the imported file (cmd + click too)
- VSCode autocompletion is improved because it can read imported files

The animated image below shows how VsCode interacts with code containing a custom import mapping.

![Animated image showing VSCode and ESLint configured to understand importmap](./docs/importmap-configuration-after.gif)

Follow steps below to configure VsCode:

1. Generate importmap using [writeImportMapFile](#writeImportMapFile)
2. Use `jsConfigFile` parameter

   VSCode import resolution can be configured in a file called [jsconfig.json](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/languages/jsconfig). Enabling `jsConfigFile` converts import mapping into `paths` and write them into `jsconfig.json`.

   <details>
      <summary>Code example using jsConfigFile</summary>

   ```js
   import { writeImportMapFile } from "@jsenv/node-module-import-map"

   const projectDirectoryUrl = new URL("./", import.meta.url)

   await writeImportMapFile(
     [
       {
         imports: {
           "src/": "./src/",
         },
       },
     ],
     {
       projectDirectoryUrl,
       jsConfigFile: true,
     },
   )
   ```

   Code above would result into the following `jsconfig.json` file

   ```json
   {
     "compilerOptions": {
       "baseUrl": ".",
       "paths": {
         "src/*": ["./src/*"]
       }
     }
   }
   ```

   </details>

At this stage, VSCode is condifured to understand import mappings. If you also want to configure ESLint to understand import mappings, follow steps described in [@jsenv/importmap-eslint-resolver](https://github.com/jsenv/jsenv-importmap-eslint-resolver#installation)

# Advanced documentation

## Custom node module resolution

`@jsenv/node-module-import-map` uses a custom node module resolution

It behaves as Node.js with one big change:

**A node module will not be found if it is outside your project directory.**

We do this because import map are used on the web where a file outside project directory cannot be reached.

In practice, it has no impact because node modules are inside your project directory. If they are not, ensure all your dependencies are in your `package.json` and re-run `npm install`.

## Extensionless import warning

If the code you wants to run contains one ore more extensionless path specifier, it will not be found by a browser (not even by Node.js).

<details>
  <summary>extensionless import example</summary>

```js
import { foo } from "./file"
```

</details>

In this situation, you can do one of the following:

1. Add extension in the source file
2. If there is a build step, ensure extension are added during the build
3. Add remapping in `exports` field of your `package.json`

```json
{
  "exports": {
    "./file": "./file.js"
  }
}
```

4. Remap manually each extensionless import and pass that importmap in [importMapInputs](#importMapInputs)

## Subpath import warning

The generation of importmap takes into account `exports` field from `package.json`. These `exports` field are used to allow subpath imports.

<details>
  <summary>subpath import example</summary>

```js
import { foo } from "my-module/feature/index.js"
import { bar } from "my-module/feature-b"
```

For the above import to work, `my-module/package.json` must contain the following `exports` field.

```json
{
  "name": "my-module",
  "exports": {
    "./*": "./*",
    "./feature-b": "./feature-b/index.js"
  }
}
```

Read more in [Node.js documentation about package entry points](https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v15.x/docs/api/packages.html#packages_package_entry_points)

</details>

Node.js allows to put `*` in `exports` field. There is an importmap equivalent when `*` is used for directory/folder remapping.

```json
{
  "exports": {
    "./feature/*": "./feature/*"
  }
}
```

Becomes the following importmap

```json
{
  "imports": {
    "./feature/": "./feature/"
  }
}
```

However using `*` to add file extension as in

```json
{
  "exports": {
    "./feature/*": "./feature/*.js"
  }
}
```

**is not supported in importmap**. Nothing suggests it will be supported for now, read more in https://github.com/WICG/import-maps/issues/232.

Commit message:

Finish doc about vscode demo

readme.md, after:

# node-module-import-map

Generate importmap for node_modules.

[![github package](https://img.shields.io/github/package-json/v/jsenv/jsenv-node-module-import-map.svg?logo=github&label=package)](https://github.com/jsenv/jsenv-node-module-import-map/packages)
[![npm package](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@jsenv/node-module-import-map.svg?logo=npm&label=package)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@jsenv/node-module-import-map)
[![github ci](https://github.com/jsenv/jsenv-node-module-import-map/workflows/ci/badge.svg)](https://github.com/jsenv/jsenv-node-module-import-map/actions?workflow=ci)
[![codecov coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/jsenv/jsenv-node-module-import-map/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/jsenv/jsenv-node-module-import-map)

# Table of contents

- [Presentation](#Presentation)
- [Usage](#Usage)
- [API](#API)
- [Configure VSCode and ESLint for importmap](#Configure-vscode-and-eslint-for-importmap)
- [Advanced documentation](#Advanced-documentation)

# Presentation

This repository generates [import map](https://github.com/WICG/import-maps) from `package.json` files in your `node_modules` directory. The generated importmap can be used to make code dependent of node module executable in a browser.

<details>
  <summary>See code relying on node module resolution</summary>

```js
import lodash from "lodash"
```

> The code above is expecting Node.js to "magically" find file corresponding to `"lodash"`. This magic is the [node module resolution algorith](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#modules_all_together).

> Other runtimes than Node.js, a browser like Chrome for instance, don't have this algorithm. Executing that code in a browser fetches `http://example.com/lodash` and likely results in `404 File Not Found` from server.

</details>

# Usage

<details>
  <summary>1 - Install <code>@jsenv/node-module-import-map</code></summary>

```console
npm install --save-dev @jsenv/node-module-import-map
```

</details>

<details>
  <summary>2 - Create <code>generate-import-map.js</code></summary>

```js
import { getImportMapFromProjectFiles, writeImportMapFile } from "@jsenv/node-module-import-map"

const projectDirectoryUrl = new URL("./", import.meta.url)

await writeImportMapFile(
  [
    getImportMapFromProjectFiles({
      projectDirectoryUrl,
    }),
  ],
  {
    projectDirectoryUrl,
    importMapFileRelativeUrl: "./project.importmap",
  },
)
```

Or use the commonjs equivalent if you need (or want):

```js
const {
  getImportMapFromProjectFiles,
  writeImportMapFile,
} = require("@jsenv/node-module-import-map")

const projectDirectoryUrl = __dirname

await writeImportMapFile(
  [
    getImportMapFromProjectFiles({
      projectDirectoryUrl,
    }),
  ],
  {
    projectDirectoryUrl,
    importMapFileRelativeUrl: "./project.importmap",
  },
)
```

</details>

<details>
  <summary>3 - Generate <code>project.importmap</code></summary>

```console
node generate-import-map.js
```

</details>

<details>
  <summary>4 - Add <code>project.importmap</code> to your html</summary>

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Title</title>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <link rel="icon" href="data:," />
    <script type="importmap" src="./project.importmap"></script>
  </head>

  <body>
    <script type="module">
      import lodash from "lodash"
    </script>
  </body>
</html>
```

If you use a bundler or an other tool, be sure it's compatible with import maps.

> Because import map are standard, you can expect your bundler/tools to be already compatible or to become compatible without plugin in a near future.

> [@jsenv/core](https://github.com/jsenv/jsenv-core) seamlessly supports importmap during development, unit testing and when building for production.

</details>

# API

## writeImportMapFile

`writeImportMapFile` is an async function receiving an array of promise resolving to importmaps. It awaits for every importmap, compose them into one and write it into a file.

<details>
  <summary>writeImportMapFile code example</summary>

Code below generate an import map from node_modules + an inline importmap.

```js
import { getImportMapFromProjectFiles, writeImportMapFile } from "@jsenv/node-module-import-map"

const projectDirectoryUrl = new URL("./", import.meta.url)
const importMapInputs = [
  getImportMapFromProjectFiles({
    projectDirectoryUrl,
    dev: true,
  }),
  {
    imports: {
      foo: "./bar.js",
    },
  },
]

await writeImportMapFile(importMapInputs, {
  projectDirectoryUrl,
  importMapFileRelativeUrl: "./import-map.importmap",
})
```

[implementation](./src/writeImportMapFile.js)

</details>

<details>
  <summary>importMapInputs parameter</summary>

`importMapInputs` is an array of importmap object or promise resolving to importmap objects. This parameter is optional and is an empty array by default.

> When `importMapInputs` is empty a warning is emitted and `writeImportMapFile` write an empty importmap file.

</details>

<details>
  <summary>importMapFile parameter</summary>

`importMapFile` parameter is a boolean controling if importMap is written to a file. This parameters is optional and enabled by default.

</details>

<details>
  <summary>importMapFileRelativeUrl parameter</summary>

`importMapFileRelativeUrl` parameter is a string controlling where importMap file is written. This parameter is optional and by default it's `"./import-map.importmap"`.

</details>

## getImportMapFromProjectFiles

`getImportMapFromProjectFiles` is an async function returning an importMap object computed from infos found in `package.json` files and source files.

The following source of information are used to create complete and coherent mappings in the importmap.

- Your `package.json`
- All `dependencies` declared in `package.json` are searched into `node_modules`, recursively.
- The main file declared in your `package.json`
- All static and dynamic import found in files, recursively.

<details>
  <summary>getImportMapFromProjectFiles code example</summary>

```js
import { getImportMapFromProjectFiles } from "@jsenv/node-module-import-map"

const importMap = await getImportMapFromProjectFiles({
  projectDirectoryUrl: new URL("./", import.meta.url),
  dev: false,
  runtime: "browser",
})
```

> Be sure node modules are on your filesystem because we'll use the filesystem structure to generate the importmap. For that reason, you must use it after `npm install` or anything that is responsible to generate the node_modules folder and its content on your filesystem.

[implementation](./src/getImportMapFromProjectFiles.js)

</details>

<details>
  <summary>projectDirectoryUrl parameter</summary>

`projectDirectoryUrl` parameter is a string url leading to a folder with a `package.json`. This parameters is **required** and accepted values are documented in [@jsenv/util#assertAndNormalizeDirectoryUrl](https://github.com/jsenv/jsenv-util#assertandnormalizedirectoryurl)

</details>

<details>
  <summary>dev parameter</summary>

`dev` parameter is a boolean indicating if the importmap will be used for development or production. This parameter is optional and by default it's disabled.

When enabled the following happens:

1. `devDependencies` declared in your `package.json` are included in the generated importMap.
2. `"development"` is favored over `"production"` in [package.json exports conditions](https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v15.x/docs/api/packages.html#packages_conditions_definitions).

</details>

<details>
  <summary>runtime parameter</summary>

`runtime` parameter is a string indicating where the importmap will be used. This parameter is optional with a default of `"browser"`.

When `runtime` is `"browser"`, `"browser"` is favored over `"node"` in [package.json exports conditions](https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v15.x/docs/api/packages.html#packages_conditions_definitions).

When it is `"node"`, `"node"` is favored.

</details>

## getImportMapFromFile

`getImportMapFromFile` is an async function reading importmap from a file.

<details>
  <summary>getImportMapFromFile code example</summary>

```js
import { getImportMapFromFile } from "@jsenv/node-module-import-map"

const importMap = await getImportMapFromFile({
  projectDirectoryUrl: new URL("./", import.meta.url),
  importMapRelativeUrl: "./import-map.importmap",
})
```

[implementation](./src/getImportMapFromFile.js)

</details>

<details>
  <summary>importMapFileRelativeUrl</summary>

`importMapFileRelativeUrl` parameter is an url relative to `projectDirectoryUrl` leading to the importmap file. This parameter is **required**.

</details>

# Configure VSCode and ESLint for importmap

VSCode and ESLint can be configured to understand importmap. This will make ESLint and VSCode capable to resolve your imports. Amongst other things it will give you the following:

- ESLint tells your when import cannot be resolved (help to fix typo)
- ESLint tells your when a named import does not exists (help to fix typo too)
- VSCode "go to definition" opens the imported file (cmd + click too)
- VSCode autocompletion is improved because it can read imported files

The animated image below shows how configuring ESLint and VsCode to understand import helps to fix an import with a typo and navigate to an imported file. This example shows how importing `"demo/log.js"` is remapped to `"src/log.js"`.

![Animated image showing importmap integration in VSCode and ESLint](./docs/importmap-configured-demo.gif)

Follow steps below to configure VsCode:

1. Generate importmap file using [writeImportMapFile](#writeImportMapFile)
2. Use `jsConfigFile` parameter

   VSCode import resolution can be configured in a file called [jsconfig.json](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/languages/jsconfig). Enabling `jsConfigFile` converts import mapping into `paths` and write them into `jsconfig.json`.

   <details>
      <summary>Code example using jsConfigFile</summary>

   ```js
   import { writeImportMapFile } from "@jsenv/node-module-import-map"

   const projectDirectoryUrl = new URL("./", import.meta.url)

   await writeImportMapFile(
     [
       {
         imports: {
           "src/": "./src/",
         },
       },
     ],
     {
       projectDirectoryUrl,
       jsConfigFile: true,
     },
   )
   ```

   Code above would result into the following `jsconfig.json` file

   ```json
   {
     "compilerOptions": {
       "baseUrl": ".",
       "paths": {
         "src/*": ["./src/*"]
       }
     }
   }
   ```

   </details>

At this stage, VsCode is configured to understand import mappings. It means "Go to definition" is working and allow you to navigate in your codebase using `cmd+click` keyboard shortcut.

If you also want to configure ESLint to be alerted when an import cannot be found, follow steps described in [@jsenv/importmap-eslint-resolver](https://github.com/jsenv/jsenv-importmap-eslint-resolver#installation)

# Advanced documentation

## Custom node module resolution

`@jsenv/node-module-import-map` uses a custom node module resolution

It behaves as Node.js with one big change:

**A node module will not be found if it is outside your project directory.**

We do this because import map are used on the web where a file outside project directory cannot be reached.

In practice, it has no impact because node modules are inside your project directory. If they are not, ensure all your dependencies are in your `package.json` and re-run `npm install`.

## Extensionless import warning

If the code you wants to run contains one ore more extensionless path specifier, it will not be found by a browser (not even by Node.js).

<details>
  <summary>extensionless import example</summary>

```js
import { foo } from "./file"
```

</details>

In this situation, you can do one of the following:

1. Add extension in the source file
2. If there is a build step, ensure extension are added during the build
3. Add remapping in `exports` field of your `package.json`

```json
{
  "exports": {
    "./file": "./file.js"
  }
}
```

4. Remap manually each extensionless import and pass that importmap in [importMapInputs](#importMapInputs)

## Subpath import warning

The generation of importmap takes into account `exports` field from `package.json`. These `exports` field are used to allow subpath imports.

<details>
  <summary>subpath import example</summary>

```js
import { foo } from "my-module/feature/index.js"
import { bar } from "my-module/feature-b"
```

For the above import to work, `my-module/package.json` must contain the following `exports` field.

```json
{
  "name": "my-module",
  "exports": {
    "./*": "./*",
    "./feature-b": "./feature-b/index.js"
  }
}
```

Read more in [Node.js documentation about package entry points](https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v15.x/docs/api/packages.html#packages_package_entry_points)

</details>

Node.js allows to put `*` in `exports` field. There is an importmap equivalent when `*` is used for directory/folder remapping.

```json
{
  "exports": {
    "./feature/*": "./feature/*"
  }
}
```

Becomes the following importmap

```json
{
  "imports": {
    "./feature/": "./feature/"
  }
}
```

However using `*` to add file extension as in

```json
{
  "exports": {
    "./feature/*": "./feature/*.js"
  }
}
```

**is not supported in importmap**. Nothing suggests it will be supported for now, read more in https://github.com/WICG/import-maps/issues/232.
